OSPRay API
==========

To access the OSPRay API you first need to include the OSPRay header

    #include "ospray/ospray.h"

where the API is compatible with C99 and C++.


Initialization and Shutdown
---------------------------

In order to use the API, OSPRay must be initialized with a "device". A
device is the object which implements the API. Creating and initializing
a device can be done in either of two ways: command line arguments or
manually instantiating a device.

### Command Line Arguments

The first is to do so by giving OSPRay the command line from `main()` by
calling

    OSPError ospInit(int *argc, const char **argv);

OSPRay parses (and removes) its known command line parameters from your
application's `main` function. For an example see the [tutorial]. For
possible error codes see section [Error Handling and Status Messages].
It is important to note that the arguments passed to `ospInit()` are
processed in order they are listed. The following parameters (which are
prefixed by convention with "`--osp:`") are understood:

  -------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  Parameter                  Description
  -------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  `--osp:debug`              enables various extra checks and debug output, and
                             disables multi-threading

  `--osp:numthreads <n>`     use `n` threads instead of per default using all
                             detected hardware threads

  `--osp:loglevel <n>`       set logging level, default `0`; increasing `n` means
                             increasingly verbose log messages

  `--osp:verbose`            shortcut for `--osp:loglevel 1`

  `--osp:vv`                 shortcut for `--osp:loglevel 2`

  `--osp:module:<name>`      load a module during initialization; equivalent to
                             calling `ospLoadModule(name)`

  `--osp:mpi`                enables MPI mode for parallel rendering with the
                             `mpi_offload` device, to be used in conjunction with
                             `mpirun`; this will automatically load the "mpi"
                             module if it is not yet loaded or linked

  `--osp:mpi-offload`        same as `--osp:mpi`

  `--osp:mpi-distributed`    same as `--osp:mpi`, but will create an
                             `mpi_distributed` device instead; Note that this
                             will likely require application changes to work
                             properly

  `--osp:logoutput <dst>`    convenience for setting where status messages go;
                             valid values for `dst` are `cerr` and `cout`

  `--osp:erroroutput <dst>`  convenience for setting where error messages go;
                             valid values for `dst` are `cerr` and `cout`

  `--osp:device:<name>`      use `name` as the type of device for OSPRay to
                             create; e.g. `--osp:device:default` gives you the
                             default local device; Note if the device to be used
                             is defined in a module, remember to pass
                             `--osp:module:<name>` first

  `--osp:setaffinity <n>`    if `1`, bind software threads to hardware threads;
                             `0` disables binding; default is `1` on KNL and `0`
                             otherwise
  -------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  : Command line parameters accepted by OSPRay's `ospInit`.

### Manual Device Instantiation

The second method of initialization is to explicitly create the device
yourself, and possibly set parameters. This method looks almost
identical to how other [objects] are created and used by OSPRay
(described in later sections). The first step is to create the device
with

    OSPDevice ospNewDevice(const char *type);

where the `type` string maps to a specific device implementation. OSPRay
always provides the "`default`" device, which maps to a local CPU
rendering device. If it is enabled in the build, you can also use
"`mpi`" to access the MPI multi-node rendering device (see [Parallel
Rendering with MPI] section for more information). Once a device is
created, you can call

    void ospDeviceSet1i(OSPDevice, const char *id, int val);
    void ospDeviceSetString(OSPDevice, const char *id, const char *val);
    void ospDeviceSetVoidPtr(OSPDevice, const char *id, void *val);

to set parameters on the device. The following parameters can be set on
all devices:

  ------ ------------ ----------------------------------------------------------
  Type   Name         Description
  ------ ------------ ----------------------------------------------------------
  int    numThreads   number of threads which OSPRay should use

  int    logLevel     logging level

  string logOutput    convenience for setting where status messages go; valid
                      values are `cerr` and `cout`

  string errorOutput  convenience for setting where error messages go; valid
                      values  are `cerr` and `cout`

  int    debug        set debug mode; equivalent to logLevel=2 and numThreads=1

  int    setAffinity  bind software threads to hardware threads if set to 1;
                      0 disables binding omitting the parameter will let OSPRay
                      choose
  ------ ------------ ----------------------------------------------------------
  : Parameters shared by all devices.

Once parameters are set on the created device, the device must be
committed with

    void ospDeviceCommit(OSPDevice);

To use the newly committed device, you must call

    void ospSetCurrentDevice(OSPDevice);

This then sets the given device as the object which will respond to all
other OSPRay API calls.

Users can change parameters on the device after initialization (from
either method above), by calling

    OSPDevice ospGetCurrentDevice();

This function returns the handle to the device currently used to respond
to OSPRay API calls, where users can set/change parameters and recommit
the device. If changes are made to the device that is already set as the
current device, it does not need to be set as current again.

### Environment Variables

Finally, OSPRay's generic device parameters can be overridden via
environment variables for easy changes to OSPRay's behavior without
needing to change the application (variables are prefixed by convention
with "`OSPRAY_`"):

  Variable            Description
  ------------------- ---------------------------------
  OSPRAY_THREADS      equivalent to `--osp:numthreads`
  OSPRAY_LOG_LEVEL    equivalent to `--osp:loglevel`
  OSPRAY_LOG_OUTPUT   equivalent to `--osp:logoutput`
  OSPRAY_ERROR_OUTPUT equivalent to `--osp:erroroutput`
  OSPRAY_DEBUG        equivalent to `--osp:debug`
  OSPRAY_SET_AFFINITY equivalent to `--osp:setaffinity`
  ------------------- ---------------------------------
  : Environment variables interpreted by OSPRay.

### Error Handling and Status Messages

The following errors are currently used by OSPRay:

  Name                   Description
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------
  OSP_NO_ERROR           no error occurred
  OSP_UNKNOWN_ERROR      an unknown error occurred
  OSP_INVALID_ARGUMENT   an invalid argument was specified
  OSP_INVALID_OPERATION  the operation is not allowed for the specified object
  OSP_OUT_OF_MEMORY      there is not enough memory to execute the command
  OSP_UNSUPPORTED_CPU    the CPU is not supported (minimum ISA is SSE4.1)
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------
  : Possible error codes, i.e. valid named constants of type `OSPError`.

These error codes are either directly return by some API functions, or
are recorded to be later queried by the application via

    OSPError ospDeviceGetLastErrorCode(OSPDevice);

A more descriptive error message can be queried by calling

    const char* ospDeviceGetLastErrorMsg(OSPDevice);

Alternatively, the application can also register a callback function of
type

    typedef void (*OSPErrorFunc)(OSPError, const char* errorDetails);

via

    void ospDeviceSetErrorFunc(OSPDevice, OSPErrorFunc);

to get notified when errors occur.

Applications may be interested in messages which OSPRay emits, whether
for debugging or logging events. Applications can call

    void ospDeviceSetStatusFunc(OSPDevice, OSPStatusFunc);

in order to register a callback function of type

    typedef void (*OSPStatusFunc)(const char* messageText);

which OSPRay will use to emit status messages. By default, OSPRay uses a
callback which does nothing, so any output desired by an application
will require that a callback is provided. Note that callbacks for C++
`std::cout` and `std::cerr` can be alternatively set through `ospInit()`
or the `OSPRAY_LOG_OUTPUT` environment variable.

### Loading OSPRay Extensions at Runtime

OSPRay's functionality can be extended via plugins, which are
implemented in shared libraries. To load plugin `name` from
`libospray_module_<name>.so` (on Linux and Mac OS\ X) or
`ospray_module_<name>.dll` (on Windows) use

    OSPError ospLoadModule(const char *name);

Modules are searched in OS-dependent paths. `ospLoadModule` returns
`OSP_NO_ERROR` if the plugin could be successfully loaded.

### Shutting Down OSPRay

When the application is finished using OSPRay (typically on application
exit), the OSPRay API should be finalized with

    void ospShutdown();

This API call ensures that the current device is cleaned up
appropriately. Due to static object allocation having non-deterministic
ordering, it is recommended that applications call `ospShutdown()`
before the calling application process
terminates.

Objects
-------

All entities of OSPRay (the renderer, volumes, geometries, lights,
cameras, ...) are a specialization of `OSPObject` and share common
mechanism to deal with parameters and lifetime.

An important aspect of object parameters is that parameters do not get
passed to objects immediately. Instead, parameters are not visible at
all to objects until they get explicitly committed to a given object via
a call to

    void ospCommit(OSPObject);

at which time all previously additions or changes to parameters are
visible at the same time. If a user wants to change the state of an
existing object (e.g., to change the origin of an already existing
camera) it is perfectly valid to do so, as long as the changed
parameters are recommitted.

The commit semantic allow for batching up multiple small changes, and
specifies exactly when changes to objects will occur. This is important
to ensure performance and consistency for devices crossing a PCI bus, or
across a network. In our MPI implementation, for example, we can easily
guarantee consistency among different nodes by MPI barrier’ing on every
commit.

Note that OSPRay uses reference counting to manage the lifetime of all
objects, so one cannot explicitly "delete" any object. Instead, to
indicate that the application does not need and does not access the
given object anymore, call

    void ospRelease(OSPObject);

This decreases its reference count and if the count reaches `0` the
object will automatically get deleted. Passing `NULL` is not an error.

### Parameters

Parameters allow to configure the behavior of and to pass data to
objects. However, objects do _not_ have an explicit interface for
reasons of high flexibility and a more stable compile-time API. Instead,
parameters are passed separately to objects in an arbitrary order, and
unknown parameters will simply be ignored. The following functions allow
adding various types of parameters with name `id` to a given object:

    // add a C-string (zero-terminated char *) parameter
    void ospSetString(OSPObject, const char *id, const char *s);

    // add an object handle parameter to another object
    void ospSetObject(OSPObject, const char *id, OSPObject object);

    // add an untyped pointer -- this will *ONLY* work in local rendering!
    void ospSetVoidPtr(OSPObject, const char *id, void *v);

    // add scalar and vector integer and float parameters
    void ospSetf  (OSPObject, const char *id, float x);
    void ospSet1f (OSPObject, const char *id, float x);
    void ospSet1i (OSPObject, const char *id, int32_t x);
    void ospSet2f (OSPObject, const char *id, float x, float y);
    void ospSet2fv(OSPObject, const char *id, const float *xy);
    void ospSet2i (OSPObject, const char *id, int x, int y);
    void ospSet2iv(OSPObject, const char *id, const int *xy);
    void ospSet3f (OSPObject, const char *id, float x, float y, float z);
    void ospSet3fv(OSPObject, const char *id, const float *xyz);
    void ospSet3i (OSPObject, const char *id, int x, int y, int z);
    void ospSet3iv(OSPObject, const char *id, const int *xyz);
    void ospSet4f (OSPObject, const char *id, float x, float y, float z, float w);
    void ospSet4fv(OSPObject, const char *id, const float *xyzw);

    // additional functions to pass vector integer and float parameters in C++
    void ospSetVec2f(OSPObject, const char *id, const vec2f &v);
    void ospSetVec2i(OSPObject, const char *id, const vec2i &v);
    void ospSetVec3f(OSPObject, const char *id, const vec3f &v);
    void ospSetVec3i(OSPObject, const char *id, const vec3i &v);
    void ospSetVec4f(OSPObject, const char *id, const vec4f &v);

Users can also remove parameters that have been explicitly set via an
ospSet call. Any parameters which have been removed will go back to
their default value during the next commit unless a new parameter
was set after the parameter was removed. The following API function
removes the named parameter from the given object:

    void ospRemoveParam(OSPObject, const char *id);

### Data

There is also the possibility to aggregate many values of the same type
into an array, which then itself can be used as a parameter to objects.
To create such a new data buffer, holding `numItems` elements of the
given type, from the initialization data pointed to by `source` and
optional creation flags, use

    OSPData ospNewData(size_t numItems,
                       OSPDataType,
                       const void *source,
                       const uint32_t dataCreationFlags = 0);

The call returns an `OSPData` handle to the created array. The flag
`OSP_DATA_SHARED_BUFFER` indicates that the buffer can be shared with
the application. In this case the calling program guarantees that the
`source` pointer will remain valid for the duration that this data array
is being used. The enum type `OSPDataType` describes the different data
types that can be represented in OSPRay; valid constants are listed in
the table below.

  Type/Name              Description
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------
  OSP_DEVICE             API device object reference
  OSP_VOID_PTR           void pointer
  OSP_DATA               data reference
  OSP_OBJECT             generic object reference
  OSP_CAMERA             camera object reference
  OSP_FRAMEBUFFER        framebuffer object reference
  OSP_LIGHT              light object reference
  OSP_MATERIAL           material object reference
  OSP_TEXTURE            texture object reference
  OSP_RENDERER           renderer object reference
  OSP_MODEL              model object reference
  OSP_GEOMETRY           geometry object reference
  OSP_VOLUME             volume object reference
  OSP_TRANSFER_FUNCTION  transfer function object reference
  OSP_PIXEL_OP           pixel operation object reference
  OSP_STRING             C-style zero-terminated character string
  OSP_CHAR               8\ bit signed character scalar
  OSP_UCHAR              8\ bit unsigned character scalar
  OSP_UCHAR[234]         ... and [234]-element vector
  OSP_USHORT             16\ bit unsigned integer scalar
  OSP_INT                32\ bit signed integer scalar
  OSP_INT[234]           ... and [234]-element vector
  OSP_UINT               32\ bit unsigned integer scalar
  OSP_UINT[234]          ... and [234]-element vector
  OSP_LONG               64\ bit signed integer scalar
  OSP_LONG[234]          ... and [234]-element vector
  OSP_ULONG              64\ bit unsigned integer scalar
  OSP_ULONG[234]         ... and [234]-element vector
  OSP_FLOAT              32\ bit single precision floating point scalar
  OSP_FLOAT[234]         ... and [234]-element vector
  OSP_FLOAT3A            ... and aligned 3-element vector
  OSP_DOUBLE             64\ bit double precision floating point scalar
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------
  : Valid named constants for `OSPDataType`.

To add a data array as parameter named `id` to another object call

    void ospSetData(OSPObject, const char *id, OSPData);


Volumes
-------

Volumes are volumetric datasets with discretely sampled values in 3D
space, typically a 3D scalar field. To create a new volume object of
given type `type` use

    OSPVolume ospNewVolume(const char *type);

The call returns `NULL` if that type of volume is not known by OSPRay,
or else an `OSPVolume` handle.

The common parameters understood by all volume variants are summarized
in the table below.

  ------------------- ------------------------ ---------  -----------------------------------
  Type                Name                       Default  Description
  ------------------- ------------------------ ---------  -----------------------------------
  OSPTransferFunction transferFunction                    [transfer function] to use

  vec2f               voxelRange                          minimum and maximum of the scalar
                                                          values

  bool                gradientShadingEnabled       false  volume is rendered with surface
                                                          shading wrt. to normalized gradient

  bool                preIntegration               false  use pre-integration for
                                                          [transfer function] lookups

  bool                singleShade                   true  shade only at the point of maximum
                                                          intensity

  bool                adaptiveSampling              true  adapt ray step size based on
                                                          opacity

  float               adaptiveScalar                  15  modifier for adaptive step size

  float               adaptiveMaxSamplingRate          2  maximum sampling rate for adaptive
                                                          sampling

  float               samplingRate                 0.125  sampling rate of the volume (this
                                                          is the minimum step size for
                                                          adaptive sampling)

  vec3f               specular                  gray 0.3  specular color for shading

  vec3f               volumeClippingBoxLower    disabled  lower coordinate (in object-space)
                                                          to clip the volume values

  vec3f               volumeClippingBoxUpper    disabled  upper coordinate (in object-space)
                                                          to clip the volume values
  ------------------- ------------------------ ---------  -----------------------------------
  : Configuration parameters shared by all volume types.

Note that if `voxelRange` is not provided for a volume then OSPRay will
compute it based on the voxel data, which may result in slower data
updates.

### Structured Volume

Structured volumes only need to store the values of the samples, because
their addresses in memory can be easily computed from a 3D position. A
common type of structured volumes are regular grids. OSPRay supports two
variants that differ in how the volumetric data for the regular grids is
specified.

The first variant shares the voxel data with the application. Such a
volume type is created by passing the type string
"`shared_structured_volume`" to `ospNewVolume`. The voxel data is laid
out in memory in XYZ order and provided to the volume via a [data]
buffer parameter named "`voxelData`".

The second regular grid variant is optimized for rendering performance:
data locality in memory is increased by arranging the voxel data in
smaller blocks. This volume type is created by passing the type string
"`block_bricked_volume`" to `ospNewVolume`. Because of this
rearrangement of voxel data it cannot be shared the with the application
anymore, but has to be transferred to OSPRay via

    OSPError ospSetRegion(OSPVolume, void *source,
                          const vec3i &regionCoords,
                          const vec3i &regionSize);

The voxel data pointed to by `source` is copied into the given volume
starting at position `regionCoords`, must be of size `regionSize` and be
placed in memory in XYZ order. Note that OSPRay distinguishes between
volume data and volume parameters. This function must be called only
after all volume parameters (in particular `dimensions` and `voxelType`,
see below) have been set and _before_ `ospCommit(volume)` is called.
If necessary then memory for the volume is allocated on the first call
to this function.

The common parameters understood by both structured volume variants are
summarized in the table below.

  ------ ----------- -----------  -----------------------------------
  Type   Name            Default  Description
  ------ ----------- -----------  -----------------------------------
  vec3i  dimensions               number of voxels in each
                                  dimension $(x, y, z)$

  string voxelType                data type of each voxel,
                                  currently supported are:

                                  "uchar" (8\ bit unsigned integer)

                                  "short" (16\ bit signed integer)

                                  "ushort" (16\ bit unsigned integer)

                                  "float" (32\ bit single precision
                                  floating point)

                                  "double" (64\ bit double precision
                                  floating point)

  vec3f  gridOrigin  $(0, 0, 0)$  origin of the grid in world-space

  vec3f  gridSpacing $(1, 1, 1)$  size of the grid cells in
                                  world-space
  ------ ----------- -----------  -----------------------------------
  : Additional configuration parameters for structured volumes.

### Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR) Volume

AMR volumes are specified as a list of bricks, which are levels of
refinement in potentially overlapping regions. There can be any number
of refinement levels and any number of bricks at any level of
refinement. An AMR volume type is created by passing the type string
"`amr_volume`" to `ospNewVolume`.

Applications should first create an `OSPData` array which holds
information about each brick. The following structure is used to
populate this array (found in `ospray.h`):

    struct amr_brick_info
    {
      box3i bounds;
      int   refinementLevel;
      float cellWidth;
    };

Then for each brick, the application should create an `OSPData` array of
`OSPData` handles, where each handle is the data per-brick. Currently we
only support `float` voxels.

  ------- ----------- -----------  -----------------------------------
  Type    Name            Default  Description
  ------- ----------- -----------  -----------------------------------
  vec3f   gridOrigin  $(0, 0, 0)$  origin of the grid in world-space

  vec3f   gridSpacing $(1, 1, 1)$  size of the grid cells in
                                   world-space

  string  amrMethod       current  sampling method; valid values are
                                   "finest", "current", or "octant"

  string  voxelType     undefined  data type of each voxel,
                                   currently supported are:

                                   "uchar" (8\ bit unsigned integer)

                                   "short" (16\ bit signed integer)

                                   "ushort" (16\ bit unsigned integer)

                                   "float" (32\ bit single precision
                                   floating point)

                                   "double" (64\ bit double precision
                                   floating point)

  OSPData brickInfo                array of info defining each brick

  OSPData brickData                array of handles to per-brick
                                   voxel data
  ------- ----------- -----------  -----------------------------------
  : Additional configuration parameters for AMR volumes.

Lastly, note that the `gridOrigin` and `gridSpacing` parameters act just
like the structured volume equivalent, but they only modify the root
(coarsest level) of refinement.

### Unstructured Volumes

Unstructured volumes can contain tetrahedral, wedge, or hexahedral
cell types, and are defined by three arrays: vertices, corresponding
field values, and eight indices per cell (first four are -1 for
tetrahedral cells, first two are -2 for wedge cells). An unstructured
volume type is created by passing the type string
"`unstructured_volume`" to `ospNewVolume`.

Field values can be specified per-vertex (`field`) or per-cell
(`cellField`). If both values are set, `cellField` takes precedence.

Similar to [triangle mesh], each tetrahedron is formed by a group of
indices into the vertices. For each vertex, the corresponding (by array
index) data value will be used for sampling when rendering. Note that
the index order for each tetrahedron does not matter, as OSPRay
internally calculates vertex normals to ensure proper sampling and
interpolation.

For wedge cells, each wedge is formed by a group of six indices into the
vertices and data value. Vertex ordering is the same as `VTK_WEDGE`:
three bottom vertices counterclockwise, then top three counterclockwise.

For hexahedral cells, each hexahedron is formed by a group of eight
indices into the vertices and data value. Vertex ordering is the same as
`VTK_HEXAHEDRON`: four bottom vertices counterclockwise, then top four
counterclockwise.

  -------- ------------------  -------  ---------------------------------------
  Type     Name                Default  Description
  -------- ------------------  -------  ---------------------------------------
  vec3f[]  vertices                     [data] array of vertex positions

  float[]  field                        [data] array of vertex data values to
                                        be sampled

  float[]  cellField                    [data] array of cell data values to be
                                        sampled

  vec4i[]  indices                      [data] array of tetrahedra indices
                                        (into vertices and field)

  string   hexMethod           planar   "planar" (faster, assumes planar sides)
                                        or "nonplanar"

  bool     precomputedNormals  true     whether to accelerate by precomputing,
                                        at a cost of 72 bytes/cell
  -------- ------------------  -------  ---------------------------------------
  : Additional configuration parameters for unstructured volumes.

### Transfer Function

Transfer functions map the scalar values of volumes to color and opacity
and thus they can be used to visually emphasize certain features of the
volume. To create a new transfer function of given type `type` use

    OSPTransferFunction ospNewTransferFunction(const char *type);

The call returns `NULL` if that type of transfer functions is not known
by OSPRay, or else an `OSPTransferFunction` handle to the created
transfer function. That handle can be assigned to a volume as parameter
"`transferFunction`" using `ospSetObject`.

One type of transfer function that is built-in in OSPRay is the linear
transfer function, which interpolates between given equidistant colors
and opacities. It is create by passing the string "`piecewise_linear`"
to `ospNewTransferFunction` and it is controlled by these parameters:

  Type         Name        Description
  ------------ ----------- ----------------------------------------------
  vec3f[]      colors      [data] array of RGB colors
  float[]      opacities   [data] array of opacities
  vec2f        valueRange  domain (scalar range) this function maps from
  ------------ ----------- ----------------------------------------------
  : Parameters accepted by the linear transfer function.


Geometries
----------

Geometries in OSPRay are objects that describe surfaces. To create a
new geometry object of given type `type` use

    OSPGeometry ospNewGeometry(const char *type);

The call returns `NULL` if that type of geometry is not known by OSPRay,
or else an `OSPGeometry` handle.

### Triangle Mesh

A traditional triangle mesh (indexed face set) geometry is created by
calling `ospNewGeometry` with type string "`triangles`". Once created, a
triangle mesh recognizes the following parameters:

  Type               Name             Description
  ------------------ ---------------- -------------------------------------------------
  vec3f(a)[]         vertex           [data] array of vertex positions
  vec3f(a)[]         vertex.normal    [data] array of vertex normals
  vec4f[] / vec3fa[] vertex.color     [data] array of vertex colors (RGBA/RGB)
  vec2f[]            vertex.texcoord  [data] array of vertex texture coordinates
  vec3i(a)[]         index            [data] array of triangle indices (into the vertex array(s))
  ------------------ ---------------- -------------------------------------------------
  : Parameters defining a triangle mesh geometry.

The `vertex` and `index` arrays are mandatory to create a valid triangle
mesh.

### Quad Mesh

A mesh consisting of quads is created by calling `ospNewGeometry` with
type string "`quads`". Once created, a quad mesh recognizes the
following parameters:

  Type               Name             Description
  ------------------ ---------------- -------------------------------------------------
  vec3f(a)[]         vertex           [data] array of vertex positions
  vec3f(a)[]         vertex.normal    [data] array of vertex normals
  vec4f[] / vec3fa[] vertex.color     [data] array of vertex colors (RGBA/RGB)
  vec2f[]            vertex.texcoord  [data] array of vertex texture coordinates
  vec4i[]            index            [data] array of quad indices (into the vertex array(s))
  ------------------ ---------------- -------------------------------------------------
  : Parameters defining a quad mesh geometry.

The `vertex` and `index` arrays are mandatory to create a valid quad
mesh. A quad is internally handled as a pair of two triangles, thus
mixing triangles and quad is supported by encoding a triangle as a quad
with the last two vertex indices being identical (`w=z`).


### Spheres

A geometry consisting of individual spheres, each of which can have an
own radius, is created by calling `ospNewGeometry` with type string
"`spheres`". The spheres will not be tessellated but rendered
procedurally and are thus perfectly round. To allow a variety of sphere
representations in the application this geometry allows a flexible way
of specifying the data of center position and radius within a [data]
array:

  ------------ ----------------- ----------------------- ---------------------------------------
  Type         Name                              Default Description
  ------------ ----------------- ----------------------- ---------------------------------------
  float        radius                               0.01  radius of all spheres
                                                          (if `offset_radius` is not used)

  OSPData      spheres                              NULL  memory holding the spatial [data] of
                                                          all spheres

  int          bytes_per_sphere                       16  size (in bytes) of each sphere within
                                                          the `spheres` array

  int          offset_center                           0  offset (in bytes) of each sphere's
                                                          "vec3f center" position (in
                                                          object-space) within the `spheres`
                                                          array

  int          offset_radius                          -1  offset (in bytes) of each sphere's
                                                          "float radius" within the `spheres`
                                                          array (`-1` means disabled and use `radius`)

  int          offset_colorID                         -1  offset (in bytes) of each sphere's
                                                          "int colorID" within the `spheres`
                                                          array (`-1` means disabled and use
                                                          the shared material color)

  vec4f[] /    color                                NULL  [data] array of colors (RGBA/RGB),
  vec3f(a)[] /                                            color is constant for each sphere
  vec4uc

  int          color_offset                           0   offset (in bytes) to the start of
                                                          the color data in `color`

  int          color_format             `color.data_type`  the format of the color data.
                                                          Can be one of:
                                                          `OSP_FLOAT4`, `OSP_FLOAT3`,
                                                          `OSP_FLOAT3A` or `OSP_UCHAR4`. Defaults
                                                          to the type of data in `color`

  int          color_stride      `sizeof(color_format)`   stride (in bytes) between each color
                                                          element in the `color` array.
                                                          Defaults to the size of a single
                                                          element of type `color_format`


  vec2f[]      texcoord                             NULL  [data] array of texture coordinates,
                                                          coordinate is constant for each sphere
  ---------- ----------------- -------------------------  ---------------------------------------
  : Parameters defining a spheres geometry.

### Cylinders

A geometry consisting of individual cylinders, each of which can have an
own radius, is created by calling `ospNewGeometry` with type string
"`cylinders`". The cylinders will not be tessellated but rendered
procedurally and are thus perfectly round. To allow a variety of cylinder
representations in the application this geometry allows a flexible way
of specifying the data of offsets for start position, end position and
radius within a [data] array. All parameters are listed in the table
below.

  ---------- ------------------- --------  -------------------------------------
  Type       Name                 Default  Description
  ---------- ------------------- --------  -------------------------------------
  float      radius                  0.01  radius of all cylinders
                                           (if `offset_radius` is not used)

  OSPData    cylinders               NULL  memory holding the spatial [data] of
                                           all cylinders

  int        bytes_per_cylinder        24  size (in bytes) of each cylinder
                                           within the `cylinders` array

  int        offset_v0                  0  offset (in bytes) of each cylinder's
                                           "vec3f v0" position (the start
                                           vertex, in object-space) within the
                                           `cylinders` array

  int        offset_v1                 12  offset (in bytes) of each cylinder's
                                           "vec3f v1" position (the end vertex,
                                           in object-space) within the
                                           `cylinders` array

  int        offset_radius             -1  offset (in bytes) of each cylinder's
                                           "float radius" within the `cylinders`
                                           array (`-1` means disabled and use
                                           `radius` instead)

  vec4f[] /  color                   NULL  [data] array of colors (RGBA/RGB),
  vec3f(a)[]                               color is constant for each cylinder

  OSPData    texcoord                NULL  [data] array of texture coordinates,
                                           in pairs (each a vec2f at vertex v0
                                           and v1)
  ---------- ------------------- --------  -------------------------------------
  : Parameters defining a cylinders geometry.

For texturing each cylinder is seen as a 1D primitive, i.e. a line
segment: the 2D texture coordinates at its vertices v0 and v1 are
linearly interpolated.

### Streamlines

A geometry consisting of multiple streamlines is created by calling
`ospNewGeometry` with type string "`streamlines`". The streamlines are
internally assembled either from connected (and rounded) cylinder
segments, or represented as Bézier curves; they are thus always
perfectly round. The parameters defining this geometry are listed in the
table below.

  ------------------ ------------- --------------------------------------------
  Type               Name          Description
  ------------------ ------------- --------------------------------------------
  float              radius        global radius of all streamlines (if
                                   per-vertex radius is not used), default 0.01

  bool               smooth        enable curve interpolation, default off
                                   (always on if per-vertex radius is used)

  vec3fa[] / vec4f[] vertex        [data] array of all vertex position (and
                                   optional radius) for *all* streamlines

  vec4f[]            vertex.color  [data] array of corresponding vertex
                                   colors (RGBA)

  float[]            vertex.radius [data] array of corresponding vertex radius

  int32[]            index         [data] array of indices to the first vertex
                                   of a link
  ------------------ ------------- --------------------------------------------
  : Parameters defining a streamlines geometry.

Each streamline is specified by a set of (aligned) control points in
`vertex`. If `smooth` is disabled and a constant `radius` is used for
all streamlines then all vertices belonging to to the same logical
streamline are connected via [cylinders], with additional [spheres] at
each vertex to create a continuous, closed surface. Otherwise,
streamlines are represented as Bézier curves, smoothly interpolating the
vertices. This mode supports per-vertex varying radii (either given in
`vertex.radius`, or in the 4th component of a *vec4f* `vertex`), but is
slower and consumes more memory. Also, the radius needs to be smaller
than the curvature radius of the Bézier curve at each location on the
curve.

A streamlines geometry can contain multiple disjoint streamlines, each
streamline is specified as a list of segments (or links)
referenced via `index`: each entry `e` of the `index` array points the
first vertex of a link (`vertex[index[e]]`) and the second vertex of the
link is implicitly the directly following one (`vertex[index[e]+1]`).
For example, two streamlines of vertices `(A-B-C-D)` and `(E-F-G)`,
respectively, would internally correspond to five links (`A-B`, `B-C`,
`C-D`, `E-F`, and `F-G`), and would be specified via an array of
vertices `[A,B,C,D,E,F,G]`, plus an array of link indices `[0,1,2,4,5]`.

### Curves

A geometry consisting of multiple curves is created by calling
`ospNewGeometry` with type string "`curves`".  The parameters defining
this geometry are listed in the table below.

  ------------------ --------------- -------------------------------------------
  Type               Name            Description
  ------------------ --------------- -------------------------------------------
  string             curveType       "flat" (ray oriented),
                                     "round" (circular cross section),
                                     "ribbon" (normal oriented flat curve)

  string             curveBasis      "linear", "bezier", "bspline", "hermite"

  vec4f[]            vertex          [data] array of vertex position and radius

  int32[]            index           [data] array of indices to the first vertex
                                     or tangent of a curve segment

  vec3f[]            vertex.normal   [data] array of curve normals (only for
                                     "ribbon" curves)

  vec3f[]            vertex.tangent  [data] array of curve tangents (only for
                                     "hermite" curves)
  ------------------ --------------- -------------------------------------------
  : Parameters defining a curves geometry.

See Embree documentation for discussion of curve types and data formatting.

### Isosurfaces

OSPRay can directly render multiple isosurfaces of a volume without
first tessellating them. To do so create an isosurfaces geometry by
calling `ospNewGeometry` with type string "`isosurfaces`". Each
isosurface will be colored according to the provided volume's [transfer
function].

  Type       Name       Description
  ---------- ---------- ------------------------------------------------------
  float[]    isovalues  [data] array of isovalues
  OSPVolume  volume     handle of the [volume] to be isosurfaced
  ---------- ---------- ------------------------------------------------------
  : Parameters defining an isosurfaces geometry.

### Slices

One tool to highlight interesting features of volumetric data is to
visualize 2D cuts (or slices) by placing planes into the volume. Such a
slices geometry is created by calling `ospNewGeometry` with type string
"`slices`". The planes are defined by the coefficients $(a,b,c,d)$ of
the plane equation $ax + by + cz + d = 0$. Each slice is colored
according to the provided volume's [transfer function].


  Type       Name       Description
  ---------- ---------- ----------------------------------------------------
  vec4f[]    planes     [data] array with plane coefficients for all slices
  OSPVolume  volume     handle of the [volume] that will be sliced
  ---------- ---------- ----------------------------------------------------
  : Parameters defining a slices geometry.

### Instances

OSPRay supports instancing via a special type of geometry. Instances are
created by transforming another given [model] `modelToInstantiate` with
the given affine transformation `transform` by calling

    OSPGeometry ospNewInstance(OSPModel modelToInstantiate, const affine3f &transform);


Renderer
--------

A renderer is the central object for rendering in OSPRay. Different
renderers implement different features and support different materials.
To create a new renderer of given type `type` use

    OSPRenderer ospNewRenderer(const char *type);

The call returns `NULL` if that type of renderer is not known, or else
an `OSPRenderer` handle to the created renderer. General parameters of
all renderers are

  ----------- ------------------ --------  ----------------------------------------
  Type        Name                Default  Description
  ----------- ------------------ --------  ----------------------------------------
  OSPModel    model                        the [model] to render

  OSPCamera   camera                       the [camera] to be used for rendering

  OSPLight[]  lights                       [data] array with handles of the [lights]

  float       epsilon              10^-6^  ray epsilon to avoid self-intersections,
                                           relative to scene diameter

  int         spp                       1  samples per pixel

  int         maxDepth                 20  maximum ray recursion depth

  float       minContribution       0.001  sample contributions below this value
                                           will be neglected to speed-up rendering

  float       varianceThreshold         0  threshold for adaptive accumulation
  ----------- ------------------ --------  ----------------------------------------
  : Parameters understood by all renderers.

OSPRay's renderers support a feature called adaptive accumulation, which
accelerates progressive [rendering] by stopping the rendering and
refinement of image regions that have an estimated variance below the
`varianceThreshold`. This feature requires a [framebuffer] with an
`OSP_FB_VARIANCE` channel.

### SciVis Renderer

The SciVis renderer is a fast ray tracer for scientific visualization
which supports volume rendering and ambient occlusion (AO). It is
created by passing the  type string "`scivis`" or "`raytracer`" to
`ospNewRenderer`. In addition to the [general parameters](#renderer)
understood by all renderers the SciVis renderer supports the following
special parameters:

  ------------- ---------------------- ------------  ----------------------------
  Type          Name                        Default  Description
  ------------- ---------------------- ------------  ----------------------------
  bool          shadowsEnabled                false  whether to compute (hard)
                                                     shadows

  int           aoSamples                         0  number of rays per sample to
                                                     compute ambient occlusion

  float         aoDistance                   10^20^  maximum distance to consider
                                                     for ambient occlusion

  bool          aoTransparencyEnabled         false  whether object transparency
                                                     is respected when computing
                                                     ambient occlusion (slower)

  bool          oneSidedLighting               true  if true back-facing
                                                     surfaces (wrt. light source)
                                                     receive no illumination

  float /       bgColor                      black,  background color and alpha
  vec3f / vec4f                         transparent  (RGBA)

  OSPTexture    maxDepthTexture                NULL  screen-sized float [texture]
                                                     with maximum far distance
                                                     per pixel
                                                     (use texture type
                                                     'texture2d')
  ------------- ---------------------- ------------  ----------------------------
  : Special parameters understood by the SciVis renderer.

Note that the intensity (and color) of AO is controlled via an [ambient
light]. If `aoSamples` is zero (the default) then ambient lights cause
ambient illumination (without occlusion).

Per default the background of the rendered image will be transparent
black, i.e. the alpha channel holds the opacity of the rendered objects.
This facilitates transparency-aware blending of the image with an
arbitrary background image by the application. The parameter `bgColor`
can be used to already blend with a constant background color (and
alpha) during rendering.

The SciVis renderer supports depth composition with images of other
renderers, for example to incorporate help geometries of a 3D UI that
were rendered with OpenGL. The screen-sized [texture] `maxDepthTexture`
must have format `OSP_TEXTURE_R32F` and flag
`OSP_TEXTURE_FILTER_NEAREST`. The fetched values are used to limit the
distance of primary rays, thus objects of other renderers can hide
objects rendered by OSPRay.

### Path Tracer

The path tracer supports soft shadows, indirect illumination and
realistic materials. This renderer is created by passing the type string
"`pathtracer`" to `ospNewRenderer`. In addition to the [general
parameters](#renderer) understood by all renderers the path tracer
supports the following special parameters:

  ---------- ---------------- --------  -------------------------------------
  Type       Name              Default  Description
  ---------- ---------------- --------  -------------------------------------
  int        rouletteDepth           5  ray recursion depth at which to
                                        start Russian roulette termination

  float      maxContribution         ∞  samples are clamped to this value
                                        before they are accumulated into
                                        the framebuffer

  OSPTexture backplate            NULL  [texture] image used as background,
                                        replacing visible lights in infinity
                                        (e.g. the [HDRI light])
  ---------- ---------------- --------  -------------------------------------
  : Special parameters understood by the path tracer.

The path tracer requires that [materials] are assigned to [geometries],
otherwise surfaces are treated as completely black.

### Model

Models are a container of scene data. They can hold the different
[geometries] and [volumes] as well as references to (and [instances] of)
other models. A model is associated with a single logical acceleration
structure. To create an (empty) model call

    OSPModel ospNewModel();

The call returns an `OSPModel` handle to the created model. To add an
already created geometry or volume to a model use

    void ospAddGeometry(OSPModel, OSPGeometry);
    void ospAddVolume(OSPModel, OSPVolume);

An existing geometry or volume can be removed from a model with

    void ospRemoveGeometry(OSPModel, OSPGeometry);
    void ospRemoveVolume(OSPModel, OSPVolume);

Finally, Models can be configured with parameters for making various
feature/performance trade-offs:

  ------------- ---------------- --------  -------------------------------------
  Type          Name              Default  Description
  ------------- ---------------- --------  -------------------------------------
  bool          dynamicScene        false  use RTC_SCENE_DYNAMIC flag (faster
                                           BVH build, slower ray traversal),
                                           otherwise uses RTC_SCENE_STATIC flag
                                           (faster ray traversal, slightly
                                           slower BVH build)

  bool          compactMode         false  tell Embree to use a more compact BVH
                                           in memory by trading ray traversal
                                           performance

  bool          robustMode          false  tell Embree to enable more robust ray
                                           intersection code paths (slightly
                                           slower)
  ------------- ---------------- --------  -------------------------------------
  : Parameters understood by Models


### Lights

To create a new light source of given type `type` use

    OSPLight ospNewLight3(const char *type);

The call returns `NULL` if that type of light is not known by the
renderer, or else an `OSPLight` handle to the created light source.
All light sources[^1] accept the following parameters:

  Type      Name        Default  Description
  --------- ---------- --------  ---------------------------------------
  vec3f(a)  color         white  color of the light
  float     intensity         1  intensity of the light (a factor)
  bool      isVisible      true  whether the light can be directly seen
  --------- ---------- --------  ---------------------------------------
  : Parameters accepted by the all lights.

The following light types are supported by most OSPRay renderers.

[^1]: The [HDRI Light] is an exception, it knows about `intensity`, but
not about `color`.

#### Directional Light / Distant Light

The distant light (or traditionally the directional light) is thought to
be very far away (outside of the scene), thus its light arrives (almost)
as parallel rays. It is created by passing the type string "`distant`"
to `ospNewLight3`. In addition to the [general parameters](#lights)
understood by all lights the distant light supports the following special
parameters:

  Type      Name             Description
  --------- ---------------- ---------------------------------------------
  vec3f(a)  direction        main emission direction of the distant light
  float     angularDiameter  apparent size (angle in degree) of the light
  --------- ---------------- ---------------------------------------------
  : Special parameters accepted by the distant light.

Setting the angular diameter to a value greater than zero will result in
soft shadows when the renderer uses stochastic sampling (like the [path
tracer]). For instance, the apparent size of the sun is about 0.53°.

#### Point Light / Sphere Light

The sphere light (or the special case point light) is a light emitting
uniformly in all directions. It is created by passing the type string
"`sphere`" to `ospNewLight3`. In addition to the [general
parameters](#lights) understood by all lights the sphere light supports
the following special parameters:

  Type      Name      Description
  --------- --------- -----------------------------------------------
  vec3f(a)  position  the center of the sphere light, in world-space
  float     radius    the size of the sphere light
  --------- --------- -----------------------------------------------
  : Special parameters accepted by the sphere light.

Setting the radius to a value greater than zero will result in soft
shadows when the renderer uses stochastic sampling (like the [path
tracer]).

#### Spot Light

The spot light is a light emitting into a cone of directions. It is
created by passing the type string "`spot`" to `ospNewLight3`. In
addition to the [general parameters](#lights) understood by all lights
the spot light supports the special parameters listed in the table.

  -------- ------------- ----------------------------------------------
  Type     Name          Description
  -------- ------------- ----------------------------------------------
  vec3f(a) position      the center of the spot light, in world-space

  vec3f(a) direction     main emission direction of the spot

  float    openingAngle  full opening angle (in degree) of the spot;
                         outside of this cone is no illumination

  float    penumbraAngle size (angle in degree) of the "penumbra", the
                         region between the rim (of the illumination
                         cone) and full intensity of the spot; should
                         be smaller than half of `openingAngle`

  float    radius        the size of the spot light, the radius of a
                         disk with normal `direction`
  -------- ------------- ----------------------------------------------
  : Special parameters accepted by the spot light.

![Angles used by SpotLight.][imgSpotLight]

Setting the radius to a value greater than zero will result in soft
shadows when the renderer uses stochastic sampling (like the [path
tracer]).

#### Quad Light

The quad^[actually a parallelogram] light is a planar, procedural area light source emitting
uniformly on one side into the half space. It is created by passing the
type string "`quad`" to `ospNewLight3`. In addition to the [general
parameters](#lights) understood by all lights the spot light supports
the following special parameters:

  Type      Name      Description
  --------- --------- -----------------------------------------------------
  vec3f(a)  position  world-space position of one vertex of the quad light
  vec3f(a)  edge1     vector to one adjacent vertex
  vec3f(a)  edge2     vector to the other adjacent vertex
  --------- --------- -----------------------------------------------------
  : Special parameters accepted by the quad light.

![Defining a Quad Light.][imgQuadLight]

The emission side is determined by the cross product of `edge1`×`edge2`.
Note that only renderers that use stochastic sampling (like the path
tracer) will compute soft shadows from the quad light. Other renderers
will just sample the center of the quad light, which results in hard
shadows.

#### HDRI Light

The HDRI light is a textured light source surrounding the scene and
illuminating it from infinity. It is created by passing the type string
"`hdri`" to `ospNewLight3`. In addition to the [parameter
`intensity`](#lights) the HDRI light supports the following special
parameters:

  ------------ ----- --------------------------------------------------
  Type         Name  Description
  ------------ ----- --------------------------------------------------
  vec3f(a)     up    up direction of the light in world-space

  vec3f(a)     dir   direction to which the center of the texture will
                     be mapped to (analog to [panoramic camera])

  OSPTexture   map   environment map in latitude / longitude format
  ------------ ----- --------------------------------------------------
  : Special parameters accepted by the HDRI light.

![Orientation and Mapping of an HDRI Light.][imgHDRILight]

Note that the currently only the [path tracer] supports the HDRI light.

#### Ambient Light

The ambient light surrounds the scene and illuminates it from infinity
with constant radiance (determined by combining the [parameters `color`
and `intensity`](#lights)). It is created by passing the type string
"`ambient`" to `ospNewLight3`.

Note that the [SciVis renderer] uses ambient lights to control the color
and intensity of the computed ambient occlusion (AO).

#### Emissive Objects

The [path tracer] will consider illumination by [geometries] which have
a light emitting material assigned (for example the [Luminous]
material).

### Materials

Materials describe how light interacts with surfaces, they give objects
their distinctive look. To let the given renderer create a new material
of given type `type` call

    OSPMaterial ospNewMaterial2(const char *renderer_type, const char *material_type);

The call returns `NULL` if the material type is not known by the
renderer type, or else an `OSPMaterial` handle to the created material. The
handle can then be used to assign the material to a given geometry with

    void ospSetMaterial(OSPGeometry, OSPMaterial);

#### OBJ Material

The OBJ material is the workhorse material supported by both the [SciVis
renderer] and the [path tracer]. It offers widely used common properties
like diffuse and specular reflection and is based on the [MTL material
format](http://paulbourke.net/dataformats/mtl/) of Lightwave's OBJ scene
files. To create an OBJ material pass the type string "`OBJMaterial`" to
`ospNewMaterial2`. Its main parameters are

  Type          Name         Default  Description
  ------------- --------- ----------  -----------------------------------------
  vec3f         Kd         white 0.8  diffuse color
  vec3f         Ks             black  specular color
  float         Ns                10  shininess (Phong exponent), usually in [2–10^4^]
  float         d             opaque  opacity
  vec3f         Tf             black  transparency filter color
  OSPTexture    map_Bump        NULL  normal map
  ------------- --------- ----------  -----------------------------------------
  : Main parameters of the OBJ material.

In particular when using the path tracer it is important to adhere to
the principle of energy conservation, i.e. that the amount of light
reflected by a surface is not larger than the light arriving. Therefore
the path tracer issues a warning and renormalizes the color parameters
if the sum of `Kd`, `Ks`, and `Tf` is larger than one in any color
channel. Similarly important to mention is that almost all materials of
the real world reflect at most only about 80% of the incoming light. So
even for a white sheet of paper or white wall paint do better not set
`Kd` larger than 0.8; otherwise rendering times are unnecessary long and
the contrast in the final images is low (for example, the corners of a
white room would hardly be discernible, as can be seen in the figure
below).

![Comparison of diffuse rooms with 100% reflecting white paint (left)
and realistic 80% reflecting white paint (right), which leads to in
higher overall contrast. Note that exposure has been adjusted to achieve
similar brightness levels.][imgDiffuseRooms]

If present, the color component of [geometries] is also used for the
diffuse color `Kd` and the alpha component is also used for the opacity
`d`.

Note that currently only the path tracer implements colored transparency
with `Tf`.

Normal mapping can simulate small geometric features via the texture
`map_Bump`. The normals $n$ in the normal map are wrt. the local
tangential shading coordinate system and are encoded as $½(n+1)$, thus a
texel $(0.5, 0.5, 1)$^[respectively $(127, 127, 255)$ for 8\ bit
textures] represents the unperturbed shading normal $(0, 0, 1)$. Because
of this encoding an sRGB gamma [texture] format is ignored and normals
are always fetched as linear from a normal map. Note that the
orientation of normal maps is important for a visually consistent look:
by convention OSPRay uses a coordinate system with the origin in the
lower left corner; thus a convexity will look green towards the top of
the texture image (see also the example image of a normal map). If this
is not the case flip the normal map vertically or invert its green
channel.

![Normal map representing an exalted square pyramidal
frustum.][imgNormalMap]

All parameters (except `Tf`) can be textured by passing a [texture]
handle, prefixed with "`map_`". The fetched texels are multiplied by the
respective parameter value. Texturing requires [geometries] with texture
coordinates, e.g. a [triangle mesh] with `vertex.texcoord` provided.
The color textures `map_Kd` and `map_Ks` are typically in one of the
sRGB gamma encoded formats, whereas textures `map_Ns` and `map_d` are
usually in a linear format (and only the first component is used).
Additionally, all textures support [texture transformations].

![Rendering of a OBJ material with wood textures.][imgMaterialOBJ]

#### Principled

The Principled material is the most complex material offered by the
[path tracer], which is capable of producing a wide variety of materials
(e.g., plastic, metal, wood, glass) by combining multiple different layers
and lobes. It uses the GGX microfacet distribution with approximate multiple
scattering for dielectrics and metals, uses the Oren-Nayar model for diffuse
reflection, and is energy conserving. To create a Principled material, pass
the type string "`Principled`" to `ospNewMaterial2`. Its parameters are
listed in the table below.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Type   Name                 Default  Description
  ------ ----------------- ----------  ------------------------------------------------------
  vec3f  baseColor          white 0.8  base reflectivity (diffuse and/or metallic)

  vec3f  edgeColor              white  edge tint (metallic only)

  float  metallic                   0  mix between dielectric (diffuse and/or specular)
                                       and metallic (specular only with complex IOR) in [0–1]

  float  diffuse                    1  diffuse reflection weight in [0–1]

  float  specular                   1  specular reflection/transmission weight in [0–1]

  float  ior                        1  dielectric index of refraction

  float  transmission               0  specular transmission weight in [0–1]

  vec3f  transmissionColor      white  attenuated color due to transmission (Beer's law)

  float  transmissionDepth          1  distance at which color attenuation is equal to
                                       transmissionColor

  float  roughness                  0  diffuse and specular roughness in [0–1], 0 is perfectly
                                       smooth

  float  anisotropy                 0  amount of specular anisotropy in [0–1]

  float  rotation                   0  rotation of the direction of anisotropy in [0–1], 1 is
                                       going full circle

  float  normal                     1  default normal map/scale for all layers

  float  baseNormal                 1  base normal map/scale (overrides default normal)

  bool   thin                   false  flag specifying whether the material is thin or solid

  float  thickness                  1  thickness of the material (thin only), affects the
                                       amount of color attenuation due to specular transmission

  float  backlight                  0  amount of diffuse transmission (thin only) in [0–2],
                                       1 is 50% reflection and 50% transmission, 2 is
                                       transmission only

  float  coat                       0  clear coat layer weight in [0–1]

  float  coatIor                  1.5  clear coat index of refraction

  vec3f  coatColor              white  clear coat color tint

  float  coatThickness              1  clear coat thickness, affects the amount of color
                                       attenuation

  float  coatRoughness              0  clear coat roughness in [0–1], 0 is perfectly smooth

  float  coatNormal                 1  clear coat normal map/scale (overrides default normal)

  float  sheen                      0  sheen layer weight in [0–1]

  vec3f  sheenColor             white  sheen color tint

  float  sheenTint                  0  how much sheen is tinted from sheenColor towards baseColor

  float  sheenRoughness           0.2  sheen roughness in [0–1], 0 is perfectly smooth

  float  opacity                    1  cut-out opacity/transparency, 1 is fully opaque
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  : Parameters of the Principled material.

All parameters can be textured by passing a [texture] handle, suffixed with "`Map`"
(e.g., "`baseColorMap`"); [texture transformations] are supported as well.

![Rendering of a Principled coated brushed metal material with textured
anisotropic rotation and a dust layer (sheen) on top.][imgMaterialPrincipled]

#### CarPaint

The CarPaint material is a specialized version of the Principled material for
rendering different types of car paints. To create a CarPaint material, pass
the type string "`CarPaint`" to `ospNewMaterial2`. Its parameters are listed
in the table below.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Type   Name                 Default  Description
  ------ ----------------- ----------  ------------------------------------------------------
  vec3f  baseColor          white 0.8  diffuse base reflectivity

  float  roughness                  0  diffuse roughness in [0–1], 0 is perfectly smooth

  float  normal                     1  normal map/scale

  float  flakeDensity               0  density of metallic flakes in [0–1], 0 disables flakes,
                                       1 fully covers the surface with flakes

  float  flakeScale               100  scale of the flake structure, higher values increase
                                       the amount of flakes

  float  flakeSpread              0.3  flake spread in [0–1]

  float  flakeJitter             0.75  flake randomness in [0–1]

  float  flakeRoughness           0.3  flake roughness in [0–1], 0 is perfectly smooth

  float  coat                       1  clear coat layer weight in [0–1]

  float  coatIor                  1.5  clear coat index of refraction

  vec3f  coatColor              white  clear coat color tint

  float  coatThickness              1  clear coat thickness, affects the amount of color
                                       attenuation

  float  coatRoughness              0  clear coat roughness in [0–1], 0 is perfectly smooth

  float  coatNormal                 1  clear coat normal map/scale

  vec3f  flipflopColor          white  reflectivity of coated flakes at grazing angle, used
                                       together with coatColor produces a pearlescent paint

  float  flipflopFalloff            1  flip flop color falloff, 1 disables the flip flop
                                       effect
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  : Parameters of the CarPaint material.

All parameters can be textured by passing a [texture] handle, suffixed with "`Map`"
(e.g., "`baseColorMap`"); [texture transformations] are supported as well.

![Rendering of a pearlescent CarPaint material.][imgMaterialCarPaint]

#### Metal

The [path tracer] offers a physical metal, supporting changing roughness
and realistic color shifts at edges. To create a Metal material pass the
type string "`Metal`" to `ospNewMaterial2`. Its parameters are

  -------- ---------- ----------  --------------------------------------------
  Type     Name          Default  Description
  -------- ---------- ----------  --------------------------------------------
  vec3f[]  ior         Aluminium  [data] array of spectral samples of complex
                                  refractive index, each entry in the form
                                  (wavelength, eta, k), ordered by wavelength
                                  (which is in nm)

  vec3f    eta                    RGB complex refractive index, real part

  vec3f    k                      RGB complex refractive index, imaginary part

  float    roughness         0.1  roughness in [0–1], 0 is perfect mirror
  -------- ---------- ----------  --------------------------------------------
  : Parameters of the Metal material.

The main appearance (mostly the color) of the Metal material is
controlled by the physical parameters `eta` and `k`, the
wavelength-dependent, complex index of refraction. These coefficients
are quite counterintuitive but can be found in [published
measurements](https://refractiveindex.info/). For accuracy the index of
refraction can be given as an array of spectral samples in `ior`, each
sample a triplet of wavelength (in nm), eta, and k, ordered
monotonically increasing by wavelength; OSPRay will then calculate the
Fresnel in the spectral domain. Alternatively, `eta` and `k` can also be
specified as approximated RGB coefficients; some examples are given in
below table.

  Metal                     eta                   k
  -------------- ----------------------- -----------------
  Ag, Silver      (0.051, 0.043, 0.041)   (5.3, 3.6, 2.3)
  Al, Aluminium   (1.5, 0.98, 0.6)        (7.6, 6.6, 5.4)
  Au, Gold        (0.07, 0.37, 1.5)       (3.7, 2.3, 1.7)
  Cr, Chromium    (3.2, 3.1, 2.3)         (3.3, 3.3, 3.1)
  Cu, Copper      (0.1, 0.8, 1.1)         (3.5, 2.5, 2.4)
  -------------- ----------------------- -----------------
  : Index of refraction of selected metals as approximated RGB
  coefficients, based on data from https://refractiveindex.info/.

The `roughness` parameter controls the variation of microfacets and thus
how polished the metal will look. The roughness can be modified by a
[texture] `map_roughness` ([texture transformations] are supported as
well) to create interesting edging effects.

![Rendering of golden Metal material with textured
roughness.][imgMaterialMetal]

#### Alloy

The [path tracer] offers an alloy material, which behaves similar to
[Metal], but allows for more intuitive and flexible control of the
color. To create an Alloy material pass the type string "`Alloy`" to
`ospNewMaterial2`. Its parameters are

  Type   Name          Default  Description
  ------ ---------- ----------  --------------------------------------------
  vec3f  color       white 0.9  reflectivity at normal incidence (0 degree)
  vec3f  edgeColor       white  reflectivity at grazing angle (90 degree)
  float  roughness         0.1  roughness, in [0–1], 0 is perfect mirror
  ------ ---------- ----------  --------------------------------------------
  : Parameters of the Alloy material.

The main appearance of the Alloy material is controlled by the parameter
`color`, while `edgeColor` influences the tint of reflections when seen
at grazing angles (for real metals this is always 100% white). If
present, the color component of [geometries] is also used for
reflectivity at normal incidence `color`. As in [Metal] the `roughness`
parameter controls the variation of microfacets and thus how polished
the alloy will look. All parameters can be textured by passing a
[texture] handle, prefixed with "`map_`"; [texture transformations] are
supported as well.

![Rendering of a fictional Alloy material with textured
color.][imgMaterialAlloy]

#### Glass

The [path tracer] offers a realistic a glass material, supporting
refraction and volumetric attenuation (i.e. the transparency color
varies with the geometric thickness). To create a Glass material pass
the type string "`Glass`" to `ospNewMaterial2`. Its parameters are

  Type   Name                  Default  Description
  ------ -------------------- --------  -----------------------------------
  float  eta                       1.5  index of refraction
  vec3f  attenuationColor        white  resulting color due to attenuation
  float  attenuationDistance         1  distance affecting attenuation
  ------ -------------------- --------  -----------------------------------
  : Parameters of the Glass material.

For convenience, the rather counterintuitive physical attenuation
coefficients will be calculated from the user inputs in such a way, that
the `attenuationColor` will be the result when white light traveled
trough a glass of thickness `attenuationDistance`.

![Rendering of a Glass material with orange
attenuation.][imgMaterialGlass]

#### ThinGlass

The [path tracer] offers a thin glass material useful for objects with
just a single surface, most prominently windows. It models a very thin,
transparent slab, i.e. it behaves as if a second, virtual surface is
parallel to the real geometric surface. The implementation accounts for
multiple internal reflections between the interfaces (including
attenuation), but neglects parallax effects due to its (virtual)
thickness. To create a such a thin glass material pass the type string
"`ThinGlass`" to `ospNewMaterial2`. Its parameters are

  Type   Name                  Default  Description
  ------ -------------------- --------  -----------------------------------
  float  eta                       1.5  index of refraction
  vec3f  attenuationColor        white  resulting color due to attenuation
  float  attenuationDistance         1  distance affecting attenuation
  float  thickness                   1  virtual thickness
  ------ -------------------- --------  -----------------------------------
  : Parameters of the ThinGlass material.

For convenience the attenuation is controlled the same way as with the
[Glass] material. Additionally, the color due to attenuation can be
modulated with a [texture] `map_attenuationColor` ([texture
transformations] are supported as well). If present, the color component
of [geometries] is also used for the attenuation color. The `thickness`
parameter sets the (virtual) thickness and allows for easy exchange of
parameters with the (real) [Glass] material; internally just the ratio
between `attenuationDistance` and `thickness` is used to calculate the
resulting attenuation and thus the material appearance.

![Rendering of a ThinGlass material with red
attenuation.][imgMaterialThinGlass]

![Example image of a colored window made with textured attenuation of
the ThinGlass material.][imgColoredWindow]


#### MetallicPaint

The [path tracer] offers a metallic paint material, consisting of a base
coat with optional flakes and a clear coat. To create a MetallicPaint
material pass the type string "`MetallicPaint`" to `ospNewMaterial2`. Its
parameters are listed in the table below.

  Type   Name            Default  Description
  ------ ------------ ----------  ----------------------------------
  vec3f  baseColor     white 0.8  color of base coat
  float  flakeAmount         0.3  amount of flakes, in [0–1]
  vec3f  flakeColor    Aluminium  color of metallic flakes
  float  flakeSpread         0.5  spread of flakes, in [0–1]
  float  eta                 1.5  index of refraction of clear coat
  ------ ------------ ----------  ----------------------------------
  : Parameters of the MetallicPaint material.

The color of the base coat `baseColor` can be textured by a [texture]
`map_baseColor`, which also supports [texture transformations]. If
present, the color component of [geometries] is also used for the color
of the base coat. parameter `flakeAmount` controls the proportion of
flakes in the base coat, so when setting it to 1 the `baseColor` will
not be visible. The shininess of the metallic component is governed by
`flakeSpread`, which controls the variation of the orientation of the
flakes, similar to the `roughness` parameter of [Metal]. Note that the
effect of the metallic flakes is currently only computed on average,
thus individual flakes are not visible.

![Rendering of a MetallicPaint material.][imgMaterialMetallicPaint]

#### Luminous

The [path tracer] supports the Luminous material which emits light
uniformly in all directions and which can thus be used to turn any
geometric object into a light source. It is created by passing the type
string "`Luminous`" to `ospNewMaterial2`. The amount of constant
radiance that is emitted is determined by combining the general
parameters of lights: [`color` and `intensity`](#lights).

![Rendering of a yellow Luminous material.][imgMaterialLuminous]

### Texture

OSPRay currently implements two texture types (`texture2d` and `volume`) and is
open for extension to other types by applications. More types may be
added in future releases.

To create a new texture use

    OSPTexture ospNewTexture(const char *type);

The call returns `NULL` if the texture could not be created with the
given parameters, or else an `OSPTexture` handle to the created
texture.

#### Texture2D

The `texture2D` texture type implements an image-based texture, where its
parameters are as follows

  Type    Name         Description
  ------- ------------ ----------------------------------
  vec2f   size         size of the textures
  int     type         `OSPTextureFormat` for the texture
  int     flags        special attribute flags for this
                       texture, currently only responds
                       to `OSP_TEXTURE_FILTER_NEAREST` or
                       no flags
  OSPData data         the actual texel data
  ------- ------------ ----------------------------------
  : Parameters of `texture2D` texture type

The supported texture formats for `texture2d` are:

  Name                Description
  ------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
  OSP_TEXTURE_RGBA8   8\ bit [0–255] linear components red, green, blue, alpha
  OSP_TEXTURE_SRGBA   8\ bit sRGB gamma encoded color components, and linear alpha
  OSP_TEXTURE_RGBA32F 32\ bit float components red, green, blue, alpha
  OSP_TEXTURE_RGB8    8\ bit [0–255] linear components red, green, blue
  OSP_TEXTURE_SRGB    8\ bit sRGB gamma encoded components red, green, blue
  OSP_TEXTURE_RGB32F  32\ bit float components red, green, blue
  OSP_TEXTURE_R8      8\ bit [0–255] linear single component
  OSP_TEXTURE_R32F    32\ bit float single component
  ------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
  : Supported texture formats by `texture2D`, i.e. valid constants
  of type `OSPTextureFormat`.

The texel data addressed by `source` starts with the texels in the lower
left corner of the texture image, like in OpenGL. Per default a texture
fetch is filtered by performing bi-linear interpolation of the nearest
2×2 texels; if instead fetching only the nearest texel is desired (i.e.
no filtering) then pass the `OSP_TEXTURE_FILTER_NEAREST` flag.

#### TextureVolume

The `volume` texture type implements texture lookups based on 3D world
coordinates of the surface hit point on the associated geometry. If the given
hit point is within the attached volume, the volume is sampled and classified
with the transfer function attached to the volume. This implements the ability
to visualize volume values (as colored by its transfer function) on arbitrary
surfaces inside the volume (as opposed to an isosurface showing a particular
value in the volume). Its parameters are as follows

  Type      Name         Description
  --------- ------------ -------------------------------------------
  OSPVolume volume       volume used to generate color lookups
  --------- ------------ -------------------------------------------
  : Parameters of `volume` texture type

### Texture2D Transformations

All materials with textures also offer to manipulate the placement of
these textures with the help of texture transformations. If so, this
convention shall be used. The following parameters (prefixed with
"`texture_name.`") are combined into one transformation matrix:

  Type   Name         Description
  ------ ------------ ------------------------------------------------------
  vec4f  transform    interpreted as 2×2 matrix (linear part), column-major
  float  rotation     angle in degree, counterclockwise, around center
  vec2f  scale        enlarge texture, relative to center (0.5, 0.5)
  vec2f  translation  move texture in positive direction (right/up)
  ------ ------------ ------------------------------------------------------
  : Parameters to define texture coordinate transformations.

The transformations are applied in the given order. Rotation, scale and
translation are interpreted "texture centric", i.e. their effect seen by
an user are relative to the texture (although the transformations are
applied to the texture coordinates).

### Cameras

To create a new camera of given type `type` use

    OSPCamera ospNewCamera(const char *type);

The call returns `NULL` if that type of camera is not known, or else an
`OSPCamera` handle to the created camera. All cameras accept these
parameters:

  Type      Name        Description
  --------- ----------- ------------------------------------------
  vec3f(a)  pos         position of the camera in world-space
  vec3f(a)  dir         main viewing direction of the camera
  vec3f(a)  up          up direction of the camera
  float     nearClip    near clipping distance
  vec2f     imageStart  start of image region (lower left corner)
  vec2f     imageEnd    end of image region (upper right corner)
  --------- ----------- ------------------------------------------
  : Parameters accepted by all cameras.

The camera is placed and oriented in the world with `pos`, `dir` and
`up`. OSPRay uses a right-handed coordinate system. The region of the
camera sensor that is rendered to the image can be specified in
normalized screen-space coordinates with `imageStart` (lower left
corner) and `imageEnd` (upper right corner). This can be used, for
example, to crop the image, to achieve asymmetrical view frusta, or to
horizontally flip the image to view scenes which are specified in a
left-handed coordinate system. Note that values outside the default
range of [0–1] are valid, which is useful to easily realize overscan or
film gate, or to emulate a shifted sensor.

#### Perspective Camera

The perspective camera implements a simple thinlens camera for
perspective rendering, supporting optionally depth of field and stereo
rendering, but no motion blur. It is created by passing the type string
"`perspective`" to `ospNewCamera`. In addition to the [general
parameters](#cameras) understood by all cameras the perspective camera
supports the special parameters listed in the table below.

  ----- ---------------------- -----------------------------------------
  Type  Name                   Description
  ----- ---------------------- -----------------------------------------
  float fovy                   the field of view (angle in degree) of
                               the frame's height

  float aspect                 ratio of width by height of the frame

  float apertureRadius         size of the aperture, controls the depth
                               of field

  float focusDistance          distance at where the image is sharpest
                               when depth of field is enabled

  bool  architectural          vertical edges are projected to be
                               parallel

  int   stereoMode             0: no stereo (default),
                               1: left eye,
                               2: right eye,
                               3: side-by-side

  float interpupillaryDistance distance between left and right eye when
                               stereo is enabled
  ----- ---------------------- -----------------------------------------
  : Parameters accepted by the perspective camera.

Note that when setting the `aspect` ratio a non-default image region
(using `imageStart` & `imageEnd`) needs to be regarded.

In architectural photography it is often desired for aesthetic reasons
to display the vertical edges of buildings or walls vertically in the
image as well, regardless of how the camera is tilted. Enabling the
`architectural` mode achieves this by internally leveling the camera
parallel to the ground (based on the `up` direction) and then shifting
the lens such that the objects in direction `dir` are centered in the
image. If finer control of the lens shift is needed use `imageStart` &
`imageEnd`. Because the camera is now effectively leveled its image
plane and thus the plane of focus is oriented parallel to the front of
buildings, the whole façade appears sharp, as can be seen in the example
images below.

![Example image created with the perspective camera, featuring depth of
field.][imgCameraPerspective]

![Enabling the `architectural` flag corrects the perspective projection
distortion, resulting in parallel vertical
edges.][imgCameraArchitectural]

![Example 3D stereo image using `stereoMode` side-by-side.][imgCameraStereo]

#### Orthographic Camera

The orthographic camera implements a simple camera with orthographic
projection, without support for depth of field or motion blur. It is
created by passing the type string  "`orthographic`" to `ospNewCamera`.
In addition to the [general parameters](#cameras) understood by all
cameras the orthographic camera supports the following special
parameters:

  Type   Name    Description
  ------ ------- ------------------------------------------------------------
  float  height  size of the camera's image plane in y, in world coordinates
  float  aspect  ratio of width by height of the frame
  ------ ------- ------------------------------------------------------------
  : Parameters accepted by the orthographic camera.

For convenience the size of the camera sensor, and thus the extent of
the scene that is captured in the image, can be controlled with the
`height` parameter. The same effect can be achieved with `imageStart`
and `imageEnd`, and both methods can be combined. In any case, the
`aspect` ratio needs to be set accordingly to get an undistorted image.

![Example image created with the orthographic camera.][imgCameraOrthographic]

#### Panoramic Camera

The panoramic camera implements a simple camera without support for
motion blur. It captures the complete surrounding with a latitude /
longitude mapping and thus the rendered images should best have a ratio
of 2:1. A panoramic camera is created by passing the type string
"`panoramic`" to `ospNewCamera`. It is placed and oriented in the scene
by using the [general parameters](#cameras) understood by all cameras.

![Latitude / longitude map created with the panoramic camera.][imgCameraPanoramic]

### Picking

To get the world-space position of the geometry (if any) seen at [0–1]
normalized screen-space pixel coordinates `screenPos` use

    void ospPick(OSPPickResult*, OSPRenderer, const vec2f &screenPos);

The result is returned in the provided `OSPPickResult` struct:

    typedef struct {
        vec3f position; // the position of the hit point (in world-space)
        bool hit;       // whether or not a hit actually occurred
    } OSPPickResult;

Note that `ospPick` considers exactly the same camera of the given
renderer that is used to render an image, thus matching results can be
expected. If the camera supports depth of field then the center of the
lens and thus the center of the circle of confusion is used for picking.


Framebuffer
-----------

The framebuffer holds the rendered 2D image (and optionally auxiliary
information associated with pixels). To create a new framebuffer object
of given size `size` (in pixels), color format, and channels use

    OSPFrameBuffer ospNewFrameBuffer(const vec2i &size,
                                     const OSPFrameBufferFormat format = OSP_FB_SRGBA,
                                     const uint32_t frameBufferChannels = OSP_FB_COLOR);

The parameter `format` describes the format the color buffer has _on the
host_, and the format that `ospMapFrameBuffer` will eventually return.
Valid values are:

  Name            Description
  --------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
  OSP_FB_NONE     framebuffer will not be mapped by the application
  OSP_FB_RGBA8    8\ bit [0–255] linear component red, green, blue, alpha
  OSP_FB_SRGBA    8\ bit sRGB gamma encoded color components, and linear alpha
  OSP_FB_RGBA32F  32\ bit float components red, green, blue, alpha
  --------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
  : Supported color formats of the framebuffer that can be passed to
  `ospNewFrameBuffer`, i.e. valid constants of type
  `OSPFrameBufferFormat`.

The parameter `frameBufferChannels` specifies which channels the
framebuffer holds, and can be combined together by bitwise OR from the
values of `OSPFrameBufferChannel` listed in the table below.

  Name             Description
  ---------------- -----------------------------------------------------------
  OSP_FB_COLOR     RGB color including alpha
  OSP_FB_DEPTH     euclidean distance to the camera (_not_ to the image plane), as linear 32\ bit float
  OSP_FB_ACCUM     accumulation buffer for progressive refinement
  OSP_FB_VARIANCE  for estimation of the current noise level if OSP_FB_ACCUM is also present, see [rendering]
  OSP_FB_NORMAL    accumulated screen-space normal of the first hit, as vec3f
  OSP_FB_ALBEDO    accumulated material albedo (color without illumination) at the first hit, as vec3f
  ---------------- -----------------------------------------------------------
  : Framebuffer channels constants (of type `OSPFrameBufferChannel`),
  naming optional information the framebuffer can store. These values
  can be combined by bitwise OR when passed to `ospNewFrameBuffer` or
  `ospFrameBufferClear`.

If a certain channel value is _not_ specified, the given buffer channel
will not be present. Note that ospray makes a very clear distinction
between the _external_ format of the framebuffer and the internal one:
The external format is the format the user specifies in the `format`
parameter; it specifies what color format OSPRay will eventually
_return_ the framebuffer to the application (when calling
`ospMapFrameBuffer`): no matter what OSPRay uses internally, it will
simply return a 2D array of pixels of that format, with possibly all
kinds of reformatting, compression/decompression, etc, going on
in-between the generation of the _internal_ framebuffer and the mapping
of the externally visible one.

In particular, `OSP_FB_NONE` is a perfectly valid pixel format for a
framebuffer that an application will never map. For example, an
application driving a display wall may well generate an intermediate
framebuffer and eventually transfer its pixel to the individual displays
using an `OSPPixelOp` [pixel operation].

The application can map the given channel of a framebuffer – and thus
access the stored pixel information – via

    const void *ospMapFrameBuffer(OSPFrameBuffer,
                                  const OSPFrameBufferChannel = OSP_FB_COLOR);

Note that `OSP_FB_ACCUM` or `OSP_FB_VARIANCE` cannot be mapped. The
origin of the screen coordinate system in OSPRay is the lower left
corner (as in OpenGL), thus the first pixel addressed by the returned
pointer is the lower left pixel of the image.

A previously mapped channel of a framebuffer can be unmapped by passing
the received pointer `mapped` to

    void ospUnmapFrameBuffer(const void *mapped, OSPFrameBuffer);

The individual channels of a framebuffer can be cleared with

    void ospFrameBufferClear(OSPFrameBuffer, const uint32_t frameBufferChannels);

When selected, `OSP_FB_COLOR` will clear the color buffer to black `(0,
0, 0, 0)`, `OSP_FB_DEPTH` will clear the depth buffer to `inf`.
`OSP_FB_ACCUM` will clear *all* accumulating buffers (`OSP_FB_VARIANCE`,
`OSP_FB_NORMAL`, and `OSP_FB_ALBEDO`, if present) and resets the
accumulation counter `accumID`.

### Pixel Operation {-}

Pixel operations are functions that are applied to every pixel that
gets written into a framebuffer. Examples include post-processing,
filtering, blending, tone mapping, or sending tiles to a display wall.
To create a new pixel operation of given type `type` use

    OSPPixelOp ospNewPixelOp(const char *type);

The call returns `NULL` if that type is not known, or else an
`OSPPixelOp` handle to the created pixel operation.

To set a pixel operation to the given framebuffer use

    void ospSetPixelOp(OSPFrameBuffer, OSPPixelOp);

#### Tone Mapper {-}

The tone mapper is a pixel operation which implements a generic filmic tone
mapping operator. Using the default parameters it approximates the Academy
Color Encoding System (ACES). The tone mapper is created by passing the type
string "`tonemapper`" to `ospNewPixelOp`. The tone mapping curve can be
customized using the parameters listed in the table below.

  ----- ---------- --------    -----------------------------------------
  Type  Name       Default     Description
  ----- ---------  --------    -----------------------------------------
  float contrast   1.6773      contrast (toe of the curve); typically is
                               in [1–2]

  float shoulder   0.9714      highlight compression (shoulder of the
                               curve); typically is in [0.9–1]

  float midIn      0.18        mid-level anchor input; default is 18%
                               gray

  float midOut     0.18        mid-level anchor output; default is 18%
                               gray

  float hdrMax     11.0785     maximum HDR input that is not clipped

  bool  acesColor  true        apply the ACES color transforms
  ----- ---------  --------    -----------------------------------------
  : Parameters accepted by the tone mapper.

To use the popular "Uncharted 2" filmic tone mapping curve instead, set the
parameters to the values listed in the table below.

  Name       Value
  ---------  --------
  contrast   1.1759
  shoulder   0.9746
  midIn      0.18
  midOut     0.18
  hdrMax     6.3704
  acesColor  false
  ---------  --------
  : Filmic tone mapping curve parameters. Note that the curve includes an
  exposure bias to match 18% middle gray.

Rendering
---------

To render a frame into the given framebuffer with the given renderer use

    float ospRenderFrame(OSPFrameBuffer, OSPRenderer,
                         const uint32_t frameBufferChannels = OSP_FB_COLOR);

The third parameter specifies what channel(s) of the framebuffer is
written to^[This is currently not implemented, i.e. all channels of
the framebuffer are always updated.]. What to render and how to
render it depends on the renderer's parameters. If the framebuffer
supports accumulation (i.e. it was created with `OSP_FB_ACCUM`) then
successive calls to `ospRenderFrame` will progressively refine the
rendered image. If additionally the framebuffer has an `OSP_FB_VARIANCE`
channel then `ospRenderFrame` returns an estimate of the current
variance of the rendered image, otherwise `inf` is returned. The
estimated variance can be used by the application as a quality indicator
and thus to decide whether to stop or to continue progressive rendering.

### Progress and Cancel {-}

To be informed about the progress of rendering the current frame the
application can register a callback function of type

    typedef int (*OSPProgressFunc)(void* userPtr, const float progress);

via

    void ospSetProgressFunc(OSPProgressFunc, void* userPtr);

The provided user pointer `userPtr` is passed as first argument to the
callback function^[That way applications can also register a member
function of a C++ class together with the `this` pointer as `userPtr`.]
and the reported progress is in (0–1]. If the callback function returns
zero than the application requests to cancel rendering, i.e. the current
`ospRenderFrame` will return at the first opportunity and the content of
the frambuffer will be undefined. Therefore, better clear the
framebuffer with `ospFrameBufferClear` then before a subsequent call of
`ospRenderFrame`.

Passing `NULL` as `OSPProgressFunc` function pointer disables the
progress callback.
