Tutorials
=========

ospTutorial
-----------

A minimal working example demonstrating how to use OSPRay can be found
at
[`apps/tutorials/ospTutorial.c`](https://github.com/ospray/ospray/blob/master/apps/ospTutorial/ospTutorial.c)^[A
C++ version that uses the C++ convenience wrappers of OSPRay's C99 API
via
[`include/ospray/ospray_cpp.h`](https://github.com/ospray/ospray/blob/master/ospray/include/ospray/ospray_cpp.h)
is available at
[`apps/tutorials/ospTutorial.cpp`](https://github.com/ospray/ospray/blob/master/apps/ospTutorial/ospTutorial.cpp).].

An example of building `ospTutorial.c` with CMake can be found in
[`apps/tutorials/ospTutorialFindospray/`](https://github.com/ospray/ospray/tree/master/apps/ospTutorial/ospTutorialFindospray).

To build the tutorial on Linux, build it in a build directory with

    gcc -std=c99 ../apps/ospTutorial/ospTutorial.c \
    -I ../ospray/include -L . -lospray -Wl,-rpath,. -o ospTutorial

On Windows build it can be build manually in a
"build_directory\\$Configuration" directory with

    cl ..\..\apps\ospTutorial\ospTutorial.c -I ..\..\ospray\include -I ..\.. ospray.lib

Running `ospTutorial` will create two images of two triangles, rendered
with the Scientific Visualization renderer with full Ambient Occlusion.
The first image `firstFrame.ppm` shows the result after one call to
`ospRenderFrame` â€“ jagged edges and noise in the shadow can be seen.
Calling `ospRenderFrame` multiple times enables progressive refinement,
resulting in antialiased edges and converged shadows, shown after ten
frames in the second image `accumulatedFrames.ppm`.

![First frame.][imgTutorial1]

![After accumulating ten frames.][imgTutorial2]


ospExamples
-----------

Apart from tutorials, `OSPRay` comes with a C++ app called
[`ospExamples`](https://github.com/ospray/ospray/tree/master/apps/ospExamples)
which is an elaborate easy-to-use tutorial, with a single interface to
try various `OSPRay` features. It is aimed at providing users with
multiple simple scenes composed of basic geometry types, lights, volumes
etc. to get started with OSPRay quickly.

`ospExamples` app runs a `GLFWOSPRayWindow` instance that manages
instances of the camera, framebuffer, renderer and other OSPRay objects
necessary to render an interactive scene. The scene is rendered on a
`GLFW` window with an `imgui` GUI controls panel for the user to
manipulate the scene at runtime.

The application is located in
[`apps/ospExamples/`](https://github.com/ospray/ospray/tree/master/apps/ospExamples)
directory and can be built with CMake. It can be run from the build
directory via:
```
./ospExamples <command-line-parameter>
```
The command line parameter is optional however.

![`ospExamples` application with default `boxes` scene.][imgOspExamples]

### Scenes

Different scenes can be selected from the `scenes` dropdown and each
scene corresponds to an instance of a special `detail::Builder` struct.
Example builders are located in
[`apps/common/ospray_testing/builders/`](https://github.com/ospray/ospray/tree/master/apps/common/ospray_testing/builders).
These builders provide a usage guide for the OSPRay scene hierarchy and
OSPRay API in the form of `cpp` wrappers. They instantiate and manage
objects for the specific scene like `cpp::Geometry`, `cpp::Volume`,
`cpp::Light` etc.

The `detail::Builder` base struct is mostly responsible for setting up
OSPRay `world` and objects common in all scenes (for example lighting
and ground plane), which can be conveniently overridden in the derived
builders.

Given below are different scenes listed with their string identifiers:

boxes
: A simple scene with `box` geometry type.

cornell_box
: A scene depicting a classic cornell box with `quad` mesh geometry type
for rendering two cubes and a `quad` light type.

curves
: A simple scene with `curve` geometry type and options to change
`curveBasis`. For details on different basis' please check documentation
of [curves].

gravity_spheres_volume
: A scene with `structuredRegular` type of [volume].

gravity_spheres_isosurface
: A scene depicting iso-surface rendering of `gravity_spheres_volume`
using geometry type `isosurface`.

perlin_noise_volumes
: An example scene with `structuredRegular` volume type depicting perlin
noise.

random_spheres
: A simple scene depicting `sphere` geometry type.

streamlines
: A scene showcasing streamlines geometry derived from `curve` geometry
type.

subdivision_cube
: A scene with a cube of `subdivision` geometry type to showcase
subdivision surfaces.

unstructured_volume
: A simple scene with a volume of `unstructured` volume type.

### Renderer

This app comes with four [renderer] options: `scivis`, `pathtracer`,
`ao` and `debug`. The app provides some common rendering controls like
`pixelSamples` and other more specific to the renderer type like
`aoSamples` for the `scivis` and `ao` renderer or `maxPathLength` for
the `pathtracer`.

The sun-sky lighting can be used in a sample scene by enabling the
`renderSunSky` option of the `pathtracer` renderer. It allows the user
to change `turbidity` and `sunDirection`. 

![Rendering an evening sky with the `renderSunSky` option.][imgRenderSunSky]


MPI Distributed Tutorials
=========================

The MPI Distributed tutorials demonstrate various ways that distributed
applications using MPI can leverage OSPRay's distributed rendering
capabilities to render distributed, replicated, and partially replicated
data across the processes. The tutorials will be built as part of OSPRay
when running cmake with

    cmake \
      -DOSPRAY_ENABLE_APPS=ON \
      -DOSPRAY_APPS_TUTORIALS=ON \
      -DOSPRAY_MODULE_MPI=ON \
      -DOSPRAY_MPI_BUILD_TUTORIALS=ON \
      <other args>

ospMPIDistribTutorial
---------------------

A minimal working example demonstrating how to use OSPRay for rendering
distributed data can be found at
[`modules/mpi/tutorials/ospMPIDistribTutorial.c`](https://github.com/ospray/ospray/blob/master/modules/mpi/tutorials/ospMPIDistribTutorial.c)^[A
C++ version that uses the C++ convenience wrappers of OSPRay's C99 API
via
[`include/ospray/ospray_cpp.h`](https://github.com/ospray/ospray/blob/master/ospray/include/ospray/ospray_cpp.h)
is available at
[`modules/mpi/tutorials/ospMPIDistribTutorial.cpp`](https://github.com/ospray/ospray/blob/master/modules/mpi/tutorials/ospMPIDistribTutorial.cpp).].

The compilation process via CMake is the similar to
[`apps/tutorials/ospTutorialFindospray/`](https://github.com/ospray/ospray/tree/master/apps/ospTutorial/ospTutorialFindospray),
with the addition of finding and linking MPI.

To build the tutorial on Linux, build it in a build directory with

    mpicc -std=c99 ../modules/mpi/tutorials/ospMPIDistribTutorial.c \
    -I ../ospray/include -L . -lospray -Wl,-rpath,. -o ospMPIDistribTutorial

On Windows build it can be build manually in a
"build_directory\\$Configuration" directory with

    cl ..\..\modules\mpi\tutorials\ospMPIDistribTutorial.c -I ..\..\ospray\include -I ..\.. ospray.lib

The MPI module does not need to be linked explicitly, as it is loaded as
a module at runtime.

![The first frame output by the `ospMPIDistribTutorial` or C++ tutorial
with 4 ranks.][imgMPIDistribTutorial1]

![The accumulated frame output by the `ospMPIDistribTutorial` or C++
tutorial with 4 ranks.][imgMPIDistribTutorial2]


ospMPIDistribTutorialSpheres and ospMPIDistribTutorialVolume
------------------------------------------------------------

The spheres and volume distributed tutorials are built as part of the
MPI tutorials when building OSPRay with the MPI module and tutorials
enabled. These tutorials demonstrate using OSPRay to render distributed
data sets where each rank owns some subregion of the data, and
displaying the output in an interactive window. The domain is
distributed in a grid among the processes, each of which will generate a
subset of the data corresponding to its subdomain.

In `ospMPIDistribTutorialSpheres`, each process generates a set of
spheres within its assigned domain. The spheres are colored from dark to
light blue, where lighter colors correspond to higher ranks.

![Running `ospMPIDistribTutorialSpheres` on 4
ranks.][imgMPIDistribTutorialSpheres]

In `ospMPIDistribTutorialVolume`, each process generates a subbrick of
volume data, which is colored by its rank.

![Running `ospMPIDistribTutorialVolume` on 4
ranks.][imgMPIDistribTutorialVolume]

ospMPIDistribTutorialPartialRepl
--------------------------------

The partially replicated MPI tutorial demonstrates how to use OSPRay's
distributed rendering capabilities to render data sets that are
partially replicated among the processes. Each pair of ranks generates
the same volume brick, allowing them to subdivide the rendering workload
between themselves. For example, when run with two ranks, each will
generate the same brick and be responsible for rendering half of the
image tiles it projects to. When run with four ranks, the pairs of ranks
0,1 and 2,3 will generate the same data and divide the rendering
workload for that data among themselves.

The image work subdivision happens automatically, based on which ranks
specify the same bounding box for their data, as demonstrated in
the tutorial.

The partially replicated distribution is useful to support load-balanced
rendering of data sets that are too large to be fully replicated among
the processes, but are small enough to be partially replicated among
them.

ospMPIDistribTutorialReplicated
-------------------------------

The replicated MPI tutorial demonstrates how OSPRay's distributed
rendering capabilities can be used to render data sets that are fully
replicated among the ranks with advanced illumination effects. In this
case, although the processes are run MPI parallel, each rank specifies
the exact same data. OSPRay's MPI parallel renderer will detect that the
data is replicated in this case and use the same image-parallel
rendering algorithms employed in the MPI offload rendering configuration
to render the data. This image-parallel rendering algorithm supports
all rendering configurations that are used in local rendering, e.g.,
path tracing, to provide high-quality images.

The replicated MPI tutorial supports the same scenes and parameters
as the [`ospExamples`][ospExamples] app described above.

This mode can be useful when high-quality rendering is desired and it is
possible to copy the entire data set on to each rank, or to accelerate
loading of a large model by leveraging a parallel file system.
